Oncology is a branch of medicine that deals with the study, treatment, diagnosis and prevention of tumors. A medical professional who practices oncology is an oncologist. The name's etymological origin is the Greek word ὄγκος , meaning "tumor", "volume" or "mass". Oncology is concerned with:Medical histories remain an important screening tool: the character of the complaints and nonspecific symptoms  may warrant further investigation for malignancy. Occasionally, a physical examination may find the location of a malignancy.Diagnostic methods include:Apart from diagnoses, these modalities  are often used to determine operability, i.e. whether it is surgically possible to remove a tumor in its entirety.Currently, a tissue diagnosis  by a pathologist is essential for the proper classification of cancer and to guide the next step of treatment. On extremely rare instances when this is not possible, "empirical therapy"  may be considered, based on the available evidence On very rare occasions, a metastatic lump or pathological lymph node is found  for which a primary tumor cannot be found. However, immunohistochemical markers often give a strong indication of the primary malignancy. This situation is referred to as "malignacy of unknown primary", and again, treatment is empirical based on past experience of the most likely origin.Depending upon the cancer identified, followup and palliative care will be administered at that time. Certain disorders  will require immediate admission and chemotherapy, while others will be followed up with regular physical examination and blood tests.Often, surgery is attempted to remove a tumor entirely. This is only feasible when there is some degree of certainty that the tumor can in fact be removed. When it is certain that parts will remain, curative surgery is often impossible, e.g. when there are metastases, Occasionally, when the tumor has invaded a structure that cannot be operated upon without risking the patient's life. Occasionally surgery can improve survival even if not all tumour tissue has been removed; the procedure is referred to as "debulking" . Surgery is also used for the palliative treatment of some of cancers, e.g. to relieve biliary obstruction, or to relieve the problems associated with some cerebral tumors. The risks of surgery must be weighed against the benefits.Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are used as a first-line radical therapy in a number of malignancies. They are also used for adjuvant therapy, i.e. when the macroscopic tumor has already been completely removed surgically but there is a reasonable statistical risk that it will recur. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are commonly used for palliation, where disease is clearly incurable: in this situation the aim is to improve the quality of life and to prolong it.Hormone manipulation is well established, particularly in the treatment of breast and prostate cancer.There is currently a rapid expansion in the use of monoclonal antibody treatments, notably for lymphoma  and breast cancer .Vaccine and other immunotherapies are the subject of intensive research.Approximately 50% of all cancer cases in the Western world can be treated to remission with radical treatment. For pediatric   patients, that number is much higher. A large number of cancer patients will die from the disease, and a significant proportion of patients with incurable cancer will die of other causes. There may be ongoing issues with symptom control associated with progressive cancer, and also with the treatment of the disease. These problems may include pain, nausea, anorexia, fatigue, immobility, and depression. Not all issues are strictly physical: personal dignity may be affected. Moral and spiritual issues are also important.While many of these problems fall within the remit of the oncologist, palliative care has matured into a separate, closely allied speciality to address the problems associated with advanced disease. Palliative care is an essential part of the multidisciplinary cancer care team. Palliative care services may be less hospital-based than oncology, with nurses and doctors who are able to visit the patient at home.There are a number of recurring ethical questions and dilemmas in oncological practice. These include:These issues are closely related to the patients' personality, religion, culture, and family life. Though these issues are complex and emotional, the answers are often achieved by the patient seeking counsel from trusted personal friends and advisors. It requires a degree of sensitivity and very good communication on the part of the oncology team to address these problems properly.There is a tremendous amount of research being conducted on all frontiers of oncology, ranging from cancer cell biology, radiation therapy to chemotherapy treatment regimens and optimal palliative care and pain relief. In the past decade, the advent of next-generation sequencing and whole-genome sequencing has completely changed our understanding of cancers. Identification of novel genetic/molecular markers will dramatically change how we diagnose and treat cancer, which will pave the way for personalized medicine.Therapeutic trials often involve patients from many different hospitals in a particular region. In the UK, patients are often enrolled in large studies coordinated by Cancer Research UK , Medical Research Council , the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer  or the National Cancer Research Network .The most valued companies worldwide whose leading products are in Oncology include Pfizer , Roche , Merck , AstraZeneca , Novartis  and Bristol-Myers Squibb  who are active in the treatment areas Kinase inhibitors, Antibodies, Immuno-oncology and Radiopharmaceuticals.