Mevalonate kinase deficiency  is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder that disrupts the biosynthesis of cholesterol and isoprenoids. It is a very rare genetic disease.It is characterized by an elevated level of immunoglobulin D in the blood.
Mevalonate kinase  is an enzyme involved in biosynthesis of cholesterols and isoprenoids and is necessary for the conversion of mevalonate to mevalonate-5-phosphate in the presence of Mg2+. MKD is due to a mutation in the gene that encodes mevalonate kinase which results in a reduced or deficient activity of this enzyme. Because of this deficiency, mevalonic acid can build up in the body, with high levels found in the urine.
The severity of MKD depends on the level of this deficiency with hyperimmunoglobulinemia D syndrome  being less severe, but more common, and mevalonic aciduria ; a more severe, but rarer form.Mevalonate kinase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, meaning that a child must inherit a defective copy of the gene from both parents to be affected. It is an example of a loss-of-function mutation. The gene which codes for mevalonate kinase consists of 10 exons at locus 12q14. About 63 pathological sequence variations in the gene have been characterized. The most common of these are V377I, I268T, H20P/N and P167L, present in 70% of affected individuals.Immunoglobulin D  is a protein produced by a certain type of white blood cells. There are five classes of Immunoglobulin: IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE and IgD. They each play an important role in the immune system. The function of IgD is still unclear, although one of its many effects is to activate the immune system.There is an increased secretion of the fever promoting cytokine interleukin 1 beta  in MKD, most likely mediated by defective protein prenylation. Prenylation refers to addition of hydrophobic isoprenoids to proteins, such as farnesyl pyrophosphate  or geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate . When isoprenoids such as these are coupled to a target protein, this affects the protein's cellular location and function. In a human monocytic MKD model it was found that the deficiency of GGPP leads to overproduction of IL-1β and defective prenylation of RhoA. This causes an increased level of Rac1 and PKB which in turn affects GTPases and B7-glycoproteins. It was earlier found that Rac1/PI3K/PKB pathway had been linked to the pathogenesis of MKD. The inactivation of RhoA acts an inducer of IL-1β mRNA transcription independent of NLRP3- or caspase-1 activity. Due to defective RhoA there is a formation of defective mitochondria  in the cell. Normally, defective mitochondria are cleared in the cell by the mechanism of autophagy. But, in MKD the clearance of defective mitochondria from the cytosol is disrupted. As a result, mitochondrial DNA starts accumulating in the cytosol, binding and activating NLRP3, which is responsible for the production of IL-1β. The activation can be direct or indirect. It can also be activated by reactive oxygen species .
It is known that monocytes and macrophages in affected individuals also produce higher levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha , interleukin 6  other than IL-Iβ During febrile  attacks, C-reactive protein  also increases. CRP is released by liver which causes inflammation.Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D with recurrent fever is a periodic fever syndrome originally described in 1984 by the internist Jos van der Meer, then at Leiden University Medical Centre. No more than 300 cases have been described worldwide. It is now recognised as an allelic variant of MKD.HIDS is one of a number of periodic fever syndromes. It is characterised by attacks of fever, arthralgia, skin lesions including cyclical mouth ulcers, and diarrhea. Laboratory features include an acute phase response  and markedly elevated IgD , although cases with normal IgD have been described.It has mainly been described in the Netherlands and France, although the international registry includes a number of cases from other countries.The differential diagnosis includes fever of unknown origin, familial Mediterranean fever  and familial Hibernian fever .Virtually all people with the syndrome have mutations in the gene for mevalonate kinase, which is part of the HMG-CoA reductase pathway, an important cellular metabolic pathway. Indeed, similar fever attacks  have been described in patients with mevalonic aciduria – an inborn error of metabolism now seen as a severe form of HIDS.It is not known how mevalonate kinase mutations cause the febrile episodes, although it is presumed that other products of the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, the prenylation chains  might play a role.Mevalonate kinase deficiency causes an accumulation of mevalonic acid in the urine, resulting from insufficient activity of the enzyme mevalonate kinase .The disorder was first described in 1985.Classified as an inborn error of metabolism, mevalonate kinase deficiency usually results in developmental delay, hypotonia, anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, various dysmorphic features, mental retardation, an overall failure to thrive and several other features.There is no treatment for MKD. But, the inflammation and the other effects can be reduced to a certain extent.Canakinumab has been approved for treatment of HIDS and has shown to be effective. The immunosuppressant drugs etanercept and anakinra have also shown to be effective. Statin drugs might decrease the level of mevalonate and are presently being investigated. A recent single case report highlighted bisphosphonates as a potential therapeutic option.Globally, less than 1 in 100,000 people have HIDS, and of these, ~200 individuals have MKD. This categorises the condition as a rare genetic disease.Mevalonic acid