Digital rectal examination , also known as a prostate exam , lit. 'palpation through the anus'), is an internal examination of the rectum performed by a healthcare provider. Prior to a 2018 report from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, DRE was a common and "dreaded" component of annual exams for older men, as it was thought to be a reliable screening test for prostate cancer.This examination may be used:The digital rectal examination is a relatively simple medical procedure. The patient undresses and is then placed in a position where the anus is accessible . If the patient is lying on his/her side, the physician will usually have her/him bring one or both legs up to his/her chest. If the patient bends over the examination table or the back of a chair, the physician will have her/him place his/her elbows on the table and squat down slightly. If the patient uses the supine position, the physician will ask the patient to slide down to the end of the examination table until his/her buttocks are positioned just beyond the end and then place her/his feet in the stirrups. The physician spreads the buttocks apart and will usually examine the external area  for any abnormalities such as hemorrhoids, lumps, or rashes. Then, as the patient relaxes and bears down , the physician slips a lubricated finger into the rectum through the anus and palpates the insides for a short time.Due to the taboos surrounding the anus and the potential for discomfort and embarrassment, the rectal exam is a common comedic device, including in episodes of Saturday Night Live, Impractical Jokers, Futurama, Family Guy, South Park and the movie Fletch, with M. Emmet Walsh as the general practitioner and Chevy Chase as the patient being examined. Similar activities to the rectal exam are attributed to extraterrestrials in video games such as Saints Row IV, Gaia Online and Destroy All Humans!. The practice of rectal exams without prior consent by medical students has been an area of concern.In veterinary medicine rectal examination is useful in dogs for analysis of the prostate , pelvic urethra, sublumbar lymph nodes, and anal glands. In horses it is a vital component of the clinical examination for colic, to determine the presence or absence of bowel torsion, impaction, or displacement. When horses undergo a rectal examination there is a small risk of a rectal tear occurring, which can be a life-threatening event, rapidly leading to peritonitis and septic shock. It is also a common procedure in cattle, and is one method of diagnosing pregnancy in both the horse and the cow.The procedure in dogs and cats is similar to humans. For the horse, the patient stands in a stock and may be sedated. The examiner puts on a long glove that extends to the shoulder. The examiner inserts the hand and arm into the rectum as far as necessary.