Corticosteroids are a class of steroid hormones that are produced in the adrenal cortex of vertebrates, as well as the synthetic analogues of these hormones. Two main classes of corticosteroids, glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, are involved in a wide range of physiological processes, including stress response, immune response, and regulation of inflammation, carbohydrate metabolism, protein catabolism, blood electrolyte levels, and behavior.Some common naturally occurring steroid hormones are cortisol , corticosterone , cortisone  and aldosterone .  The main corticosteroids produced by the adrenal cortex are cortisol and aldosterone.Synthetic pharmaceutical drugs with corticosteroid-like effects are used in a variety of conditions, ranging from hematological neoplasms to brain tumors or skin diseases. Dexamethasone and its derivatives are almost pure glucocorticoids, while prednisone and its derivatives have some mineralocorticoid action in addition to the glucocorticoid effect. Fludrocortisone  is a synthetic mineralocorticoid. Hydrocortisone  is typically used for replacement therapy, e.g. for adrenal insufficiency and congenital adrenal hyperplasia.Medical conditions treated with systemic corticosteroids:Topical formulations are also available for the skin, eyes , lungs , nose , and bowels. Corticosteroids are also used supportively to prevent nausea, often in combination with 5-HT3 antagonists .Typical undesired effects of glucocorticoids present quite uniformly as drug-induced Cushing's syndrome. Typical mineralocorticoid side-effects are hypertension , steroid induced diabetes mellitus, psychosis, poor sleep, hypokalemia , hypernatremia  without causing peripheral edema, metabolic alkalosis and connective tissue weakness. Wound healing or ulcer formation may be inhibited by the immunosuppressive effects.Clinical and experimental evidence indicates that corticosteroids can cause permanent eye damage by inducing central serous retinopathy . This should be borne in mind when treating patients with optic neuritis. There is experimental and clinical evidence that, at least in optic neuritis speed of treatment initiation is important.A variety of steroid medications, from anti-allergy nasal sprays  to topical skin creams, to eye drops , to prednisone have been implicated in the development of CSR.Corticosteroids have been widely used in treating people with traumatic brain injury. A systematic review identified 20 randomised controlled trials and included 12,303 participants, then compared patients who received corticosteroids with patients who received no treatment.  The authors recommended people with traumatic head injury should not be routinely treated with corticosteroids.Corticosteroids act as agonists of the glucocorticoid receptor and/or the mineralocorticoid receptor.In addition to their corticosteroid activity, some corticosteroids may have some progestogenic activity and may produce sex-related side effects.Patients' response to inhaled corticosteroids has some basis in genetic variations. Two genes of interest are CHRH1  and TBX21 . Both genes display some degree of polymorphic variation in humans, which may explain how some patients respond better to inhaled corticosteroid therapy than others. However, not all asthma patients respond to corticosteroids and large sub groups of asthma patients are corticosteroid resistant.A study funded by the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute of children and teens with mild persistent asthma found that using the control inhaler as needed worked the same as daily use in improving asthma control, number of asthma flares, how well the lungs work, and quality of life. Children and teens using the inhaler as needed used about one-fourth the amount of corticosteroid medicine as children and teens using it daily.Use of corticosteroids has numerous side-effects, some of which may be severe:The corticosteroids are synthesized from cholesterol within the adrenal cortex. Most steroidogenic reactions are catalysed by enzymes of the cytochrome P450 family. They are located within the mitochondria and require adrenodoxin as a cofactor .Aldosterone and corticosterone share the first part of their biosynthetic pathway. The last part is mediated either by the aldosterone synthase  or by the 11β-hydroxylase . These enzymes are nearly identical , but aldosterone synthase is also able to perform an 18-oxidation. Moreover, aldosterone synthase is found within the zona glomerulosa at the outer edge of the adrenal cortex; 11β-hydroxylase is found in the zona fasciculata and zona glomerulosa.In general, corticosteroids are grouped into four classes, based on chemical structure. Allergic reactions to one member of a class typically indicate an intolerance of all members of the class. This is known as the "Coopman classification".The highlighted steroids are often used in the screening of allergies to topical steroids.Hydrocortisone, hydrocortisone acetate, cortisone acetate, tixocortol pivalate, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, and prednisone.Amcinonide, budesonide, desonide, fluocinolone acetonide, fluocinonide, halcinonide, and triamcinolone acetonide.Beclometasone, betamethasone, dexamethasone, fluocortolone, halometasone, and mometasone.Alclometasone dipropionate, betamethasone dipropionate, betamethasone valerate, clobetasol propionate, clobetasone butyrate, fluprednidene acetate, and mometasone furoate.Ciclesonide, cortisone acetate, hydrocortisone aceponate, hydrocortisone acetate, hydrocortisone buteprate, hydrocortisone butyrate, hydrocortisone valerate, prednicarbate, and tixocortol pivalate.For use topically on the skin, eye, and mucous membranes.Topical corticosteroids are divided in potency classes I to IV in most countries . Seven categories are used in the United States to determine the level of potency of any given topical corticosteroid.For nasal mucosa, sinuses, bronchi, and lungs.This group includes:There also exist certain combination preparations such as Advair Diskus in the United States, containing fluticasone propionate and salmeterol , and Symbicort, containing budesonide and formoterol fumarate dihydrate . They are both approved for use in children over 12 years old.Such as prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, or dexamethasone.Available in injectables for intravenous and parenteral routes.Tadeusz Reichstein, Edward Calvin Kendall, and Philip Showalter Hench were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology and Medicine in 1950 for their work on hormones of the adrenal cortex, which culminated in the isolation of cortisone.Initially hailed as a miracle cure and liberally prescribed during the 1950s, steroid treatment brought about adverse events of such a magnitude that the next major category of anti-inflammatory drugs, the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs , was so named in order to demarcate from the opprobrium. Corticosteroids were voted Allergen of the Year in 2005 by the American Contact Dermatitis Society.Lewis Sarett of Merck & Co. was the first to synthesize cortisone, using a 36-step process that started with deoxycholic acid, which was extracted from ox bile. The low efficiency of converting deoxycholic acid into cortisone led to a cost of US$200 per gram. Russell Marker, at Syntex, discovered a much cheaper and more convenient starting material, diosgenin from wild Mexican yams. His conversion of diosgenin into progesterone by a four-step process now known as Marker degradation was an important step in mass production of all steroidal hormones, including cortisone and chemicals used in hormonal contraception.In 1952, D.H. Peterson and H.C. Murray of Upjohn developed a process that used Rhizopus mold to oxidize progesterone into a compound that was readily converted to cortisone. The ability to cheaply synthesize large quantities of cortisone from the diosgenin in yams resulted in a rapid drop in price to US$6 per gram, falling to $0.46 per gram by 1980. Percy Julian's research also aided progress in the field. The exact nature of cortisone's anti-inflammatory action remained a mystery for years after, however, until the leukocyte adhesion cascade and the role of phospholipase A2 in the production of prostaglandins and leukotrienes was fully understood in the early 1980s.The cortico- part of the name refers to the adrenal cortex, which makes these steroid hormones. Thus a corticosteroid is a "cortex steroid".