Sucralfate, sold under various brand names, is a medication used to treat stomach ulcers, gastroesophageal reflux disease , radiation proctitis, and stomach inflammation and to prevent stress ulcers. Its usefulness in people infected by H. pylori is limited. It is used by mouth  and rectally .Common side effects include constipation. Serious side effects may include bezoar formation and encephalopathy. Use appears to be safe in pregnancy and breastfeeding. How it works is unclear but is believed to involve binding to the ulcer and protecting it from further damage.Sucralfate was approved for medical use in the United States in 1981. It is available as a generic medication. In 2020, it was the 182nd most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 2 million prescriptions.Sucralfate is used for the treatment of active duodenal ulcers not related to the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs , as the mechanism behind these ulcers is due to acid oversecretion. It is not FDA approved for gastric ulcers, but is widely used because of evidence of efficacy. The use for sucralfate in peptic ulcer disease has diminished recently, but it is still the preferred agent for stress ulcer prevention.Sucralfate has also been used for the following conditions:The most common side effect seen is constipation . Less commonly reported side effects  include flatulence, headache, hypophosphatemia, xerostomia , and bezoar formation.
Use of this drug is not recommended for people with chronic kidney failure, as it might cause aluminium accumulation and toxicity.
A few well-controlled studies have been carried out investigating the safety and efficacy of sucralfate in children and pregnant women .Sucralfate is a locally acting substance that in an acidic environment  reacts with hydrochloric acid in the stomach to form a cross-linking, viscous, paste-like material capable of acting as an acid buffer for as long as 6 to 8 hours after a single dose. It also attaches to proteins on the surface of ulcers, such as albumin and fibrinogen, to form stable insoluble complexes. These complexes serve as protective barriers at the ulcer surface, preventing further damage from acid, pepsin, and bile. In addition, sucralfate prevents back diffusion of hydrogen ions, and adsorbs both pepsin and bile acids.It has been thought that sucralfate also stimulates the production of prostaglandin E2, epidermal growth factors , bFGF, and gastric mucus.Brand names include Carafate in U.S.A., Sucramal in Italy, Sucrafil, Sufrate, Sucralpro, Sucralcoat, Pepsigard, Sucral, Hapifate, Sucralpro in India, Sutra or Musin in parts of South-East Asia, Sulcrate in Canada, Discral  in México, Ulsanic in South Africa and Israel, Andapsin in Sweden and Antepsin. Sucracell in India.