A steroid  is a biologically active organic compound with four rings arranged in a specific molecular configuration. Steroids have two principal biological functions: as important components of cell membranes that alter membrane fluidity; and as signaling molecules. Hundreds of steroids are found in plants, animals and fungi. All steroids are manufactured in cells from the sterols lanosterol  or cycloartenol . Lanosterol and cycloartenol are derived from the cyclization of the triterpene squalene.The steroid core structure is typically composed of seventeen carbon atoms, bonded in four "fused" rings: three six-member cyclohexane rings  and one five-member cyclopentane ring . Steroids vary by the functional groups attached to this four-ring core and by the oxidation state of the rings. Sterols are forms of steroids with a hydroxy group at position three and a skeleton derived from cholestane.: 1785f  Steroids can also be more radically modified, such as by changes to the ring structure, for example, cutting one of the rings. Cutting Ring B produces secosteroids one of which is vitamin D3.Examples include anabolic steroids, the lipid cholesterol, the sex hormones estradiol and testosterone,: 10–19  and the anti-inflammatory drug dexamethasone.Gonane, also known as steran or cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene, the simplest steroid and the nucleus of all steroids and sterols, is composed of seventeen carbon atoms in carbon-carbon bonds forming four fused rings in a three-dimensional shape. The three cyclohexane rings  form the skeleton of a perhydro derivative of phenanthrene. The D ring has a cyclopentane structure. When the two methyl groups and eight carbon side chains  are present, the steroid is said to have a cholestane framework. The two common 5α and 5β stereoisomeric forms of steroids exist because of differences in the side of the largely planar ring system where the hydrogen  atom at carbon-5 is attached, which results in a change in steroid A-ring conformation. Isomerisation at the C-21 side chain produces a parallel series of compounds, referred to as isosteroids.Examples of steroid structures are:Testosterone, the principal male sex hormone and an anabolic steroidCholic acid, a bile acid, showing the carboxylic acid and additional hydroxyl groups often presentDexamethasone, a synthetic corticosteroid drugLanosterol, the biosynthetic precursor to animal steroids. The number of carbons  indicates its triterpenoid classification.Progesterone, a steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy, and embryogenesisMedrogestone, a synthetic drug with effects similar to progesteroneβ-Sitosterol, a plant or phytosterol, with a fully branched hydrocarbon side chain at C-17 and an hydroxyl group at C-3In addition to the ring scissions , expansions and contractions —all variations in the carbon-carbon bond framework—steroids can also vary:For instance, sterols such as cholesterol and lanosterol have a hydroxyl group attached at position C-3, while testosterone and progesterone have a carbonyl  at C-3; of these, lanosterol alone has two methyl groups at C-4 and cholesterol  differs from testosterone and progesterone .In eukaryotes, steroids are found in fungi, animals, and plants.Fungal steroids include the ergosterols, which are involved in maintaining the integrity of the fungal cellular membrane. Various antifungal drugs, such as amphotericin B and azole antifungals, utilize this information to kill pathogenic fungi. Fungi can alter their ergosterol content  to develop resistance to drugs that target ergosterol.Ergosterol is analogous to the cholesterol found in the cellular membranes of animals , or the phytosterols found in the cellular membranes of plants. All mushrooms contain large quantities of ergosterol, in the range of tens to hundreds of milligrams per 100 grams of dry weight. Oxygen is necessary for the synthesis of ergosterol in fungi.Ergosterol is responsible for the vitamin D content found in mushrooms; ergosterol is chemically converted into provitamin D2 by exposure to ultraviolet light. Provitamin D2 spontaneously forms vitamin D2. However, not all fungi utilize ergosterol in their cellular membranes; for example, the pathogenic fungal species Pneumocystis jirovecii does not, which has important clinical implications . Using the fungus Saccharomyces cerevisiae as an example, other major steroids include ergosta‐5,7,22,24‐tetraen‐3β‐ol, zymosterol, and lanosterol. S. cerevisiae utilizes 5,6‐dihydroergosterol in place of ergosterol in its cell membrane.Animal steroids include compounds of vertebrate and insect origin, the latter including ecdysteroids such as ecdysterone . Vertebrate examples include the steroid hormones and cholesterol; the latter is a structural component of cell membranes that helps determine the fluidity of cell membranes and is a principal constituent of plaque . Steroid hormones include:Plant steroids include steroidal alkaloids found in Solanaceae and Melanthiaceae , cardiac glycosides, the phytosterols and the brassinosteroids .In prokaryotes, biosynthetic pathways exist for the tetracyclic steroid framework  – where its origin from eukaryotes is conjectured – and the more-common pentacyclic triterpinoid hopanoid framework.The major classes of steroid hormones, with prominent members and examples of related functions, are:Additional classes of steroids include:As well as the following class of secosteroids :Steroids can be classified based on their chemical composition. One example of how MeSH performs this classification is available at the Wikipedia MeSH catalog. Examples of this classification include:In biology, it is common to name the above steroid classes by the number of carbon atoms present when referring to hormones: C18-steroids for the estranes , C19-steroids for the androstanes , and C21-steroids for the pregnanes . The classification "17-ketosteroid" is also important in medicine.The gonane  is the parent 17-carbon tetracyclic hydrocarbon molecule with no alkyl sidechains.Secosteroids  are a subclass of steroidal compounds resulting, biosynthetically or conceptually, from scission  of parent steroid rings . Major secosteroid subclasses are defined by the steroid carbon atoms where this scission has taken place. For instance, the prototypical secosteroid cholecalciferol, vitamin D3 , is in the 9,10-secosteroid subclass and derives from the cleavage of carbon atoms C-9 and C-10 of the steroid B-ring; 5,6-secosteroids and 13,14-steroids are similar.Norsteroids  and homosteroids  are structural subclasses of steroids formed from biosynthetic steps. The former involves enzymic ring expansion-contraction reactions, and the latter is accomplished  or  through ring closures of acyclic precursors with more  ring atoms than the parent steroid framework.Combinations of these ring alterations are known in nature. For instance, ewes who graze on corn lily ingest cyclopamine  and veratramine, two of a sub-family of steroids where the C- and D-rings are contracted and expanded respectively via a biosynthetic migration of the original C-13 atom. Ingestion of these C-nor-D-homosteroids results in birth defects in lambs: cyclopia from cyclopamine and leg deformity from veratramine. A further C-nor-D-homosteroid  is excreted by Okinawan cyanobacteriosponges. e.g., Terpios hoshinota, leading to coral mortality from black coral disease.  Nakiterpiosin-type steroids are active against the signaling pathway involving the smoothened and hedgehog proteins, a pathway which is hyperactive in a number of cancers.Steroids and their metabolites often function as signalling molecules , and steroids and phospholipids are components of cell membranes. Steroids such as cholesterol decrease membrane fluidity.
Similar to lipids, steroids are highly concentrated energy stores. However, they are not typically sources of energy; in mammals, they are normally metabolized and excreted.Steroids play critical roles in a number of disorders, including malignancies like prostate cancer, where steroid production inside and outside the tumour promotes cancer cell aggressiveness.The hundreds of steroids found in animals, fungi, and plants are made from lanosterol  or cycloartenol . Both lanosterol and cycloartenol derive from cyclization of the triterpenoid squalene. Lanosterol and cycloartenol are sometimes called protosterols because they serve as the starting compounds for all other steroids.Steroid biosynthesis is an anabolic pathway which produces steroids from simple precursors. A unique biosynthetic pathway is followed in animals , making the pathway a common target for antibiotics and other anti-infection drugs. Steroid metabolism in humans is also the target of cholesterol-lowering drugs, such as statins. In humans and other animals the biosynthesis of steroids follows the mevalonate pathway, which uses acetyl-CoA as building blocks for dimethylallyl diphosphate  and isopentenyl diphosphate .In subsequent steps DMAPP and IPP conjugate to form farnesyl diphosphate , which further conjugates with each other to form the linear triterpenoid squalene. Squalene biosynthesis is catalyzed by squalene synthase, which belongs to the squalene/phytoene synthase family. Subsequent epoxidation and cyclization of squalene generate lanosterol, which is the starting point for additional modifications into other steroids . In other eukaryotes, the cyclization product of epoxidized squalene  is cycloartenol.The mevalonate pathway  begins with acetyl-CoA and ends with dimethylallyl diphosphate  and isopentenyl diphosphate .DMAPP and IPP donate isoprene units, which are assembled and modified to form terpenes and isoprenoids . Here, the isoprene units are joined to make squalene and folded into a set of rings to make lanosterol. Lanosterol can then be converted into other steroids, such as cholesterol and ergosterol.Two classes of drugs target the mevalonate pathway: statins , which are used to reduce elevated cholesterol levels, and bisphosphonates , which are used to treat a number of bone-degenerative diseases.Steroidogenesis is the biological process by which steroids are generated from cholesterol and changed into other steroids. The pathways of steroidogenesis differ among species. The major classes of steroid hormones, as noted above , are the progestogens, corticosteroids , androgens, and estrogens. Human steroidogenesis of these classes occurs in a number of locations:In plants and bacteria, the non-mevalonate pathway  uses pyruvate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate as substrates to produce IPP and DMAPP.During diseases pathways otherwise not significant in healthy humans can become utilized. For example, in one form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia a deficiency in the 21-hydroxylase enzymatic pathway leads to an excess of 17α-Hydroxyprogesterone  – this pathological excess of 17-OHP in turn may be converted to dihydrotestosterone  through among others 17,20 Lyase , 5α-Reductase and 3α-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase.Steroids are primarily oxidized by cytochrome P450 oxidase enzymes, such as CYP3A4. These reactions introduce oxygen into the steroid ring, allowing the cholesterol to be broken up by other enzymes into bile acids. These acids can then be eliminated by secretion from the liver in bile. The expression of the oxidase gene can be upregulated by the steroid sensor PXR when there is a high blood concentration of steroids. Steroid hormones, lacking the side chain of cholesterol and bile acids, are typically hydroxylated at various ring positions or oxidized at the 17 position, conjugated with sulfate or glucuronic acid and excreted in the urine.Steroid isolation, depending on context, is the isolation of chemical matter required for chemical structure elucidation, derivitzation or degradation chemistry, biological testing, and other research needs . The amount isolated depends on the analytical method, but is generally less than one microgram.The methods of isolation to achieve the two scales of product are distinct, but include extraction, precipitation, adsorption, chromatography, and crystallization. In both cases, the isolated substance is purified to chemical homogeneity; combined separation and analytical methods, such as LC-MS, are chosen to be "orthogonal"—achieving their separations based on distinct modes of interaction between substance and isolating matrix—to detect a single species in the pure sample.Structure determination refers to the methods to determine the chemical structure of an isolated pure steroid, using an evolving array of chemical and physical methods which have included NMR and small-molecule crystallography.: 10–19  Methods of analysis overlap both of the above areas, emphasizing analytical methods to determining if a steroid is present in a mixture and determining its quantity.Microbial catabolism of phytosterol side chains yields C-19 steroids, C-22 steroids, and 17-ketosteroids .  The addition and modification of functional groups is key when producing the wide variety of medications available within this chemical classification. These modifications are performed using conventional organic synthesis and/or biotransformation techniques.The semisynthesis of steroids often begins from precursors such as cholesterol, phytosterols, or sapogenins. The efforts of Syntex, a company involved in the Mexican barbasco trade, used Dioscorea mexicana to produce the sapogenin diosgenin in the early days of the synthetic steroid pharmaceutical industry.Some steroidal hormones are economically obtained only by total synthesis from petrochemicals . For example, the pharmaceutical Norgestrel begins from methoxy-1-tetralone, a petrochemical derived from phenol.A number of Nobel Prizes have been awarded for steroid research, including: